he's back, flit! come on, meeko. 
help me turn this thing over. 
thinking. meeko! 
i know it means something, i just don't know what. 
maybe i should. come on, flit. quit playing around, we have to get back. 
i especially love his smile. 
wingapo, father. 
i am so glad you've come home safely. 
father, for many nights now i've been having a very strange dream. i think it's telling me something's about to happen, something exciting. 
really, what is it? 
marry kocoum? 
but he's so. . . serious. 
father, i think my dream is pointing me down another path. 
but why can't i choose— 
he wants me to be steady. . . like the river. but it's not steady at all. what i love most about rivers is you can't step in the same river twice the water's always changing, always flowing but people, i guess, can't live like that we all must pay a price to be safe we lose our chance of ever knowing what's around the riverbend waiting just around the riverbend i look once more just about the riverbend beyond the shore where the gulls fly free don't know what for what i dream the day might send just around the riverbend for me coming for me i feel it there beyond those trees or right behind these waterfalls can i ignore that sound of distant drumming? for a handsome, sturdy husband who builds handsome, sturdy walls and never dreams that something might be coming just around the riverbend just around the riverbend i look once more just around the riverbend beyond the shore somewhere past the sea don't know what for why do all my dreams extend just around the riverbend just around the riverbend should i choose the smoothest course? steady as the beating drum should i marry kocoum? is all my dreaming at an end? or do you still wait for me, dream giver just around the riverbend? 
grandmother willow, i need to talk to you. 
that's what i wanted to talk to you about. my father wants me to marry kocoum. 
i know. my father thinks it's the right path for me. but lately i've been having this dream and i think it's— 
well, i'm running through the woods and then right there in front of me is an arrow. as i look at it, it starts to spin. 
yes! it spins faster and faster and faster until suddenly it stops. 
but grandmother willow, what is my path? how am i ever going to find it? 
she did? what did you tell her? 
i hear the wind. 
i don't understand. 
it's saying something's coming! strange clouds? 
clouds. strange clouds. 
mattaque natorath. 
pocahontas. 
my name is pocahontas. 
helmet. 
quiyoughcohannock. 
you have the most unusual name, too. john smith. 
meeko! 
nothing's happening. 
this is how we say hello. wingapo. 
and how we say goodbye. ana. 
flit just doesn't like strangers. 
very stubborn. 
meeko! come back here! 
meeko bring that back! 
what was that? 
compass? 
london? is that your village? 
what's it like? 
i'd like to see those things. 
how? 
make the most of it? 
our houses are fine. 
savages?! 
just my people. 
let go! 
like me. 
what you mean is, not like you. you think i'm an ignorant savage and you've been so many places, i guess it must be so but still i cannot see if the savage one is me how can there be so much that you don't know? you don't know you think you own whatever land you land on the earth is just a dead thing you can claim but i know every rock and tree and creature has a life, has a spirit, has a name you think the only people who are people are the people who look and think like you but if you walk the footsteps of a stranger you'll learn things you never knew you never knew have you ever heard the wolf cry to the bluecorn moon? or asked the grinning bobcat why he grinned? can you sing with all the voices of the mountain? can you paint with all the colours of the wind? can you paint with all the colours of the wind? come run the hidden pine trails of the forest come taste the sunsweet berries of the earth come roll in all the riches all around you and for once, never wonder what they're worth the rainstorm and the river are my brothers the heron and the otter are my friends and we are all connected to each other in a circle, in a hoop that never ends how high does the sycamore grow? if you cut it down, then you'll never know and you'll never hear the wolf cry to the bluecorn moon for whether we are white or copperskinned we need to sing with all the voices of the mountain we need to paint with all the colours of the wind you can own the earth and still all you'll own is earth until you can paint with all the colours of the wind 
the drums. they mean trouble. i shouldn't be here. 
i can't. 
i'm sorry. i have to go. 
we'll be all right. 
yes, father. 
i miss her. 
i would be honoured by that. 
what? 
i'm not hiding anything. 
what are you doing here? 
please, don't say anything. quick, this way. 
gold? 
what's gold? 
oh, here, we've lots of it. 
gold. 
hmm, there's nothing like that around here. 
not that i've seen. 
will they leave? 
will you go home? 
you could belong here. 
did you see something? 
look again. 
then you should talk back. 
say something. 
anything you want. 
i knew you would. ben
smith! smith! where are ya, mate? 
when will i see you again? 
what am i doing? i shouldn't be seeing him again. i mean, i want to see him again— 
but still, something inside is telling me it's the right thing. 
my dream? do you think he's the one the spinning arrow was pointing to? 
kocoum! 
father, i need to speak with you. 
we don't have to fight them! there must be a better way. 
but maybe we should try talking to them. 
but if one of them did want to talk, you would listen to him, wouldn't you? 
wouldn't you? 
nakoma! 
i have to do this. 
you don't know him. 
i'm trying to help my people. 
i won't, i know what i'm doing. 
the warriors are here! 
john! 
maybe it's not too late to stop this. you have to come with me and talk to my father. 
meeko, come back! 
come, come here! 
what are you doing? meeko! 
the ripples. 
kocoum, no! kocoum! leave him alone! 
kocoum, stop! 
thomas
both eyes open! 
you killed him! 
get away from him! 
he killed him! native american warriors 
but father! 
i was only trying to help. 
kocoumwas just coming to protect me. 
all of this happened because of me. . . and now i'll never see john smith again. 
i'm so sorry. 
it would've been better if we'd never met, none of this would've happened. 
i thought our love would be so beautiful somehow we'd make the whole world bright i never knew that fear and hate could be so strong all they'd leave us were these whispers in the night but still my heart is saying we were right for if i never knew you 
if i never knew this love 
i would have no inkling of 
how precious life can be 
i can't leave you. 
never knowing why 
& john smithlost forever if i never knew you 
they're going to kill him at sunrise, grandmother willow. 
i can't. 
i was wrong, grandmother willow. i followed the wrong path. i feel so lost. 
the compass? spinning arrow! 
i was right! it was pointing to him. 
sunrise! 
i don't know what i can do still i know i've got to try english & native americans now we make them pay 
eagle help my feet to fly english & native americans now without a warning 
mountain, help my heart be great english & native americans now we leave them blood and bone and dust 
spirits of the earth and sky english & native americans it's them or us 
please don't let it be too late english & native americans they're just a bunch of filthy, stinking savages, savages demons, devils, kill them savages, savages what are we waiting for? destroy their evil race until there's not a trace left 
how loud are the drums of war english & native americans we will sound the drums of war savages, savages now we sound the drums of war now we see what comes of trying to be chums 
is the death of all i love carried in the drumming of english & native americans war 
no! if you kill him you'll have to kill me, too. 
i won't! i love him, father. look around you. this is where the path of hatred has brought us. this is the path i choose, father. what will yours be? 
here. it's from grandmother willow's bark. it'll help with the pain. 
my mother's necklace. 
i'm needed here. 
no, you have to go back. 
you never will. no matter what happens, i'll always be with you. forever. and i'm so grateful to you 
